SWIP-16 Support LLM-as-Judge on Top of GenAI Observability (#13943)
apache/skywalking: docs/en/setup/backend/ai-evaluation.md

# AI Evaluation

SkyWalking can use an external OpenAI-compatible judge model to evaluate sampled GenAI spans. The result is stored as a `GenAIEvaluationRecord`; `SCORE` tasks also produce the `gen_ai_model_evaluation_score_ppm` metric for the Virtual GenAI dashboard.

The feature is disabled by default. It applies to GenAI spans received through SkyWalking native tracing, OTLP, and Zipkin, so the corresponding GenAI instrumentation and span attributes must already be present.

## Enable the module

Set the module selector when starting OAP:

```yaml
ai-evaluation:
  selector: ${SW_AI_EVALUATION:-}
```

For the built-in provider, set `SW_AI_EVALUATION=default`. The judge configuration is read from `config/ai-evaluation.yml`. OAP remains inactive when the judge endpoint, model, API key, or system prompt is missing.

> The module sends span content to the configured judge endpoint. Review the endpoint's data handling and estimate model cost before enabling it in production.

Reviewer: This makes the evaluator's content requirements and the agent opt-in actionable for operators.

```suggestion
## Instrumentation prerequisites

AI evaluation only processes GenAI spans containing non-empty `gen_ai.input.messages` and `gen_ai.output.messages` attributes. Spans missing either attribute are skipped as incomplete.

For Spring AI instrumented by the SkyWalking Java agent, enable message collection explicitly:

    SW_PLUGIN_SPRINGAI_COLLECT_INPUT_MESSAGES=true
    SW_PLUGIN_SPRINGAI_COLLECT_OUTPUT_MESSAGES=true

For OTLP and Zipkin ingestion, ensure the instrumentation exports the equivalent `gen_ai.input.messages` and `gen_ai.output.messages` attributes.

These attributes may contain user prompts and model responses, and the module sends their content to the configured judge endpoint. Review the endpoint's data handling, privacy requirements, and estimated model cost before enabling collection in production.
```
